.github/workflows/README.md, before:

# Deterministic Simulation Check

This GitHub Action verifies that the AgentFarm simulation produces deterministic results when run with specific configuration parameters.

## Purpose

The workflow ensures that:
- The simulation terminates consistently (e.g., at step 168 out of 1000 maximum steps)
- Final agent counts match expected values
- Simulation timing is within expected bounds
- Any changes to the codebase don't break deterministic behavior

**Determinism Note**: Results may vary across different OS/BLAS/CUDA versions. This check validates consistency within the same environment. Cross-platform determinism requires additional validation.

## Configuration

The workflow is configured to check for these expected results:

- **Early Termination**: The simulation should terminate early (before reaching 1000 steps)
- **Final Agent Count**: Should be 0 (all agents died)
- **Simulation Time**: Should be between 1-300 seconds

## Expected Behavior

Based on your deterministic simulation results:
- Simulation runs with `--environment development --profile simulation --steps 1000 --seed 42`
- Should terminate early at step 168 due to all agents dying
- Final agent count should be 0
- Results should be identical across runs with the same seed

## Customization

To modify the expected values, edit the environment variables in the "Verify deterministic results" step:

```yaml
env:
  EXPECTED_EARLY_TERMINATION: 1  # 1 for early termination, 0 for full run
  EXPECTED_AGENT_COUNT: 0        # Expected final number of agents
  EXPECTED_MIN_TIME: 1.0         # Minimum simulation time in seconds
  EXPECTED_MAX_TIME: 300.0       # Maximum simulation time in seconds
```

## Failure Handling

- **Errors**: Will fail the workflow if final agent count or timing is unexpected
- **Warnings**: Will warn if early termination behavior changes (currently set as warning, can be changed to error)

## Simulation Parameters

The workflow runs the simulation with these parameters:
- Environment: `development`
- Profile: `simulation`
- Steps: `1000`
- Seed: `42` (for deterministic results)
- In-memory database (for faster execution)
- No persistence to disk

## Artifacts

The workflow uploads simulation results as artifacts, including:
- Database files (`simulations/`)
- Log files (`logs/`)

These can be downloaded for further analysis if the workflow fails.

---

## CI Test Suite (`tests.yml`)

Runs the project test suites on pushes and pull requests to `main`.

### What it runs

- Python tests
  - Sets up Python 3.10
  - Caches pip dependencies for faster builds
  - Installs dependencies from `requirements.txt`
  - Runs `pytest` with coverage reporting (`--cov=farm --cov-report=term-missing`)

- JavaScript UI tests
  - Sets up Node.js 20
  - Caches npm dependencies for faster builds
  - Working directory: `farm/editor`
  - Installs dependencies (`npm ci` with fallback to `npm install`)
  - Runs Jest tests (`npm test -- --runInBand`)

### Triggers

- `push` to `main`
- `pull_request` targeting `main`

### How to run locally

```bash
# Python
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
pytest -q --cov=farm --cov-report=term-missing

# JS UI
cd farm/editor
npm install
npm test -- --runInBand
```

### Customize

- Change Python version in `actions/setup-python@v5` (`python-version`)
- Change Node version in `actions/setup-node@v4` (`node-version`)
- Adjust coverage flags in the pytest step
- Add caching (pip/npm) to speed up CI if needed

Commit message:

Update GitHub Actions workflow documentation to reflect changes in simulation expectations, including full run completion and updated agent count. Adjusted expected timing parameters and error handling for early termination scenarios.

.github/workflows/README.md, after:

# Deterministic Simulation Check

This GitHub Action verifies that the AgentFarm simulation produces deterministic results when run with specific configuration parameters.

## Purpose

The workflow ensures that:

- The simulation runs to completion (all 1000 steps)
- Final agent counts match expected values (32 agents)
- Simulation timing is within expected bounds
- Any changes to the codebase don't break deterministic behavior

**Determinism Note**: Results may vary across different OS/BLAS/CUDA versions. This check validates consistency within the same environment. Cross-platform determinism requires additional validation.

## Configuration

The workflow is configured to check for these expected results:

- **No Early Termination**: The simulation should run all 1000 steps without terminating early
- **Final Agent Count**: Should be 32 (agents survive through the full simulation)
- **Simulation Time**: Should be between 60-600 seconds

## Expected Behavior

Based on your deterministic simulation results:

- Simulation runs with `--environment development --profile simulation --steps 1000 --seed 42`
- Should run to completion (all 1000 steps)
- Final agent count should be 32
- Results should be identical across runs with the same seed

## Customization

To modify the expected values, edit the environment variables in the "Verify deterministic results" step:

```yaml
env:
  EXPECTED_EARLY_TERMINATION: 0  # 1 if simulation terminates early, 0 if runs full 1000 steps
  EXPECTED_AGENT_COUNT: 32        # Final agent count from deterministic run with seed 42
  EXPECTED_MIN_TIME: 60.0         # Minimum expected simulation time in seconds
  EXPECTED_MAX_TIME: 600.0        # Maximum expected simulation time in seconds (10 minutes)
```

## Failure Handling

- **Errors**: Will fail the workflow if early termination occurs unexpectedly, final agent count is incorrect, or timing is out of bounds

## Simulation Parameters

The workflow runs the simulation with these parameters:

- Environment: `development`
- Profile: `simulation`
- Steps: `1000`
- Seed: `42` (for deterministic results)
- In-memory database (for faster execution)
- No persistence to disk

## Artifacts

The workflow uploads simulation results as artifacts, including:

- Database files (`simulations/`)
- Log files (`logs/`)

These can be downloaded for further analysis if the workflow fails.

---

## CI Test Suite (`tests.yml`)

Runs the project test suites on pushes and pull requests to `main`.

### What it runs

- Python tests
  - Sets up Python 3.10
  - Caches pip dependencies for faster builds
  - Installs dependencies from `requirements.txt`
  - Runs `pytest` with coverage reporting (`--cov=farm --cov-report=term-missing`)

- JavaScript UI tests
  - Sets up Node.js 20
  - Caches npm dependencies for faster builds
  - Working directory: `farm/editor`
  - Installs dependencies (`npm ci` with fallback to `npm install`)
  - Runs Jest tests (`npm test -- --runInBand`)

### Triggers

- `push` to `main`
- `pull_request` targeting `main`

### How to run locally

```bash
# Python
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
pytest -q --cov=farm --cov-report=term-missing

# JS UI
cd farm/editor
npm install
npm test -- --runInBand
```

### Customize

- Change Python version in `actions/setup-python@v5` (`python-version`)
- Change Node version in `actions/setup-node@v4` (`node-version`)
- Adjust coverage flags in the pytest step
- Add caching (pip/npm) to speed up CI if needed
